added ns-o-ran-grafana tutorial (#13)
open-5g/openrangym: _posts/tutorials/2024-02-25-ns-o-ran-grafana.md

---
layout: post

> title: "Graphical Visualization of simulated ns-3 data with Grafana"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Graphical Visualization of ns-O-RAN data with Grafana"
```

> date: 2022-02-25

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-02-25
```

#### Prerequisites
[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) is needed for this tutorial.

### Services and Ports
The following services will be opened thanks to Docker Compose:
##### Grafana
- URL: http://localhost:3000 
- User: admin 
- Password: admin 

##### Telegraf
- Port: 8125 UDP (StatsD input)

##### InfluxDB
- Port: 8086 (HTTP API)
- User: admin 
- Password: admin 
- Database: influx

### How to run the project
Start the stack with docker compose
```bash
$ docker compose up
```
Then open Grafana in a browser, using:
- URL: http://localhost:3000 
- User: admin 
- Password: admin 
and select a dashboard. On a terminal, run the python script

```bash
$ docker compose exec ns3 /bin/bash
$ cd ns3-mmwave-oran
$ python3 sim_watcher.py
```

> This script is a watchdog that monitors the output files of the ns3 simulation within the directory. The data generated by ns3 is analyzed and sent via Telegraf to InfluxDB, from which Grafana extracts the data for visualization. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script is a watchdog that monitors the output files of the ns-3 simulation within the directory. The data generated by ns-3 is collected and sent to InfluxDB through Telegraf, which is then pulled by Grafana for visualization. 
```

On another terminal, run the ns3 simulation
```bash
$ docker compose exec ns3 /bin/bash
$ cd ns3-mmwave-oran
$ ./waf --run "scratch/scenario-zero.cc --enableE2FileLogging=1"
```
You may want to set the following options in the last command:
1. `--RngRun=n`, where n is a positive integer representing the seed for the pseudo-random number generator.
2. `--simTime=x`, where x is the simulation time (in seconds)

If you want, you can access the InfluxDB service with:
```bash
$ docker compose exec influxdb influx
> use influx # to select the database called "influx"
```
and visualize the metrics with:
```bash
> show measurements
```
or the entire tables with queries. For instance:
```bash
> select * from /L3servingSINR3gpp_cell_[0-9]/
```
show the tables containing SINR3 values measured at the network (L3) level for the 5G cells.

### Dashboards

> In Grafana, go to 'Dashboard' then 'Manage'. 

Reviewer: Rewrite the introduction

Author: Do you mean this part?

"This tutorial demonstrates the process of visualizing ns-3 simulation data through Grafana. The following example involve extracting data from an ns-3 simulation and transmitting it to an InfluxDB server using Telegraf, in order for Grafana to collect and present the data on a dashboard, facilitating convenient analysis and interpretation. Four distinct dashboards have been designed to showcase the data derived from “cu-up,” “cu-cp,” and “du” files within the simulation container. The fourth dashboard specifically plots aggregated data points of interest. All the code is available in [this repository](https://github.com/wineslab/ns-o-ran-grafana)."

Author: I think this is better:

"This tutorial illustrates how to visualize ns-O-RAN simulation data using Grafana. The presented example extracts information from an ns-3 simulation, sending it to InfluxDB through Telegraf. This process enables Grafana to pull and display the data on a dashboard, streamlining analysis and interpretation. Four dashboards were created, with three specifically designed to visualize data extracted from the simulation's "cu-up," "cu-cp," and "du" files. The fourth dashboard is dedicated to plotting aggregated points of interest. All the code is available in [this repository](https://github.com/wineslab/ns-o-ran-grafana)."

Reviewer: Better, thanks implement this

<img src="/assets/post-assets/grafana_manage_dashboard_option.png" class="post-image" alt="Grafana Manage Dashboard Option" width="30%" >

> Four dashboard are available to be displayed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Four dashboards are available:
```
